[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Books love me.
>> The name of the library
is Bibliotheca Philosophica
Hermetica, the Library
of Hermetic Philosophy.
This library, with the
rare books and manuscripts,
altogether, some 23,000 volumes.
>> The possibilities that I
had to buy books was always
combined with the task to
produce every day a result
as an entrepreneur.
So I built a company.
And I made out of the
profits of my company.
But it is not so that the books
come like birds into the house
of treasures of Mr. Ritman.
Now, you have to make an
effort to acquire them.
I built a library.
I bought books.
I brought them together.
The books that are
on the shelves,
you have to open the
information suddenly.
You come to the point
that you are not
standing alone any longer.
And that is the
fantastic point what I
call, the chain of [INAUDIBLE].
We are invited to be members.
>> That's what I love
most in this library.
To see that in every single
book in a different way.
And a book doesn't stand alone.
They stand together.
They are like in a continuous
conversation with each other.
And that's what fascinates me.
>> By Western esotericism,
we mean a set of currents
of movements, of authors, that
can go back basically to Late
Antiquity and then to the
Middle Ages with a big revival
in the early modern period
during the Renaissance.
And then which continue
during the Enlightenment
and also throughout the
19th and 20th century.
Basically up to our days.
>> Western esotericism is
the study from the outside
to the inner reality.
You can call that
occult streams,
you can call that
esoteric streams.
You can call that
hermetic streams.
It is like to dive into
all the different aspects
of a tradition.
>> Traditions that emerged
and developed mostly in Europe
and in the Mediterranean basin.
>> To compose an alphabet
of understanding.
But it never gives the meaning
of the language itself.
>> Approaching the
divine, approaching kind
of metaphysical reality,
are precisely what we can
understand as the
core of esotericism.
>> I was very interested
in the human presence.
But not as the end of the story,
but the beginning of the story
where I said, what is the man?
Why is he here?
He comes from the invisible, he
lives here, and he disappears.
If you look through
the Hubble telescope
you can see this
infinite universe.
And you see all different forms
of energy that are, in a way,
on the move.
Perhaps we did not know but
we are experiencing a Big Bang
again.
We say you have the elements--
Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.
But I believe, for myself,
that there's a new element
in the atmosphere.
A new element in the atmosphere
that was invisible and came
to mystery schools and under the
protection of ceremonies where
there is a holy of holiness.
There this divine energy
was kept as a secret.
I think that divine
energy is now
available to billions
and millions of persons.
And that is the
so-called individualism.
Why if that doesn't refer any
longer, not a second longer,
with the old tradition,
with the old generation,
with the way you think,
you live, you are?
The domination of
the past is broken.
It all ends in anarchy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And that you see in this moment.
The international
power feuds, conflicts,
that we are in a crisis.
Nobody can say, I have
nothing to do with that.
It comes closer and closer.
We are not independent.
We are very dependent, more and
more dependent, to each other,
as we thought in the past.
>> We have main
collecting areas.
And they are Hermetica, Alchemy,
Mysticism and Rosicrucianism.
But related collecting areas
are Kabbalah but also theosophy,
anthroposophy, so the more
modern movements originating
from the 19th century
can also be found here.
>> Esotericism is in
fact a modern word.
Because it was created
in the 19th century.
But in fact, the history
of the term is older.
The word comes from the Greek.
The ancient Greek
esoterikos, which
is an objective, which
basically means "interior."
It means something
that is inner.
So something that is
inside, as opposed
to something that is outside.
And in ancient Greece the
term was used especially
to refer to philosophy,
to philosophical schools.
For instance, in
the case of Plato,
in the case of
Aristotle, the idea
was that there was a
particular teaching that
was meant for a broader public.
And then there was a more
restrictive kind of teaching.
And that teaching
would be reserved only
for a particular elite.
So you really needed
to be a pupil.
>> That's Hermes Trismegistus.
That's called filius noster.
And here you see the Sun,
the Moon and coming together,
it brings forward
Hermes Trismegistus.
He's having can you
say this, and it
is the symbol of initiate.
The [INAUDIBLE],, the cloak,
an attribute of power.
The text of Hermes Trismegistus
are written down already
in the pyramids of
Sakkara in Egypt.
>> We have an exhibition
on Hermes Trismegistus And
the visual imagery
connected with Hermes,
a very colorful exhibition that
shows you the roots of Hermes
Trismegistus.
He is part Egyptian, part Greek.
He is the Egyptian god
Thoth and the Greek Hermes.
And these two combined
were Hermes Trismegistus.
This is a beautiful image
of Hermes Trismegistus.
It's a reproduction
from a mosaic in Sienna.
He is a wisdom teacher, a sage
who presents to the Egyptians
the laws and the letters.
>> Originally the
distinction, perhaps,
did not have much to
do with spirituality.
Later on this idea was
connected to the ancient mystery
cults like [INAUDIBLE] or
the Mysteries of Eleusis.
And therefore a more
spiritual meaning
was attached to the word.
And it was thought that in
fact, an esoteric teaching
had to do with something
that was religious, something
that was spiritual.
So it had to do, for instance,
with the destiny of man
after death.
That is basically the
origin of the modern concept
of esotericism.
>> This is one of the most
important books in our library,
a book by Hermes Trismegistus,
the name giver of the library
of course.
Hermes.
And we collect all the editions
of his philosophical works.
We call it now the
Corpus Hermeticum.
In the older days it
was called Pimandre,
after the pupil that is
instructed by the philosopher
Hermes.
>> The Egyptian god Thoth,
and the Greek Hermes,
they are both
scribes, messengers.
And magic is also attributed
to the two of them.
And that is why they
were conflated and became
Hermes Trismegistus,
the thrice greatest.
>> Classical culture becomes
less prominent during
the Middle Ages.
Greek culture was
sort of forgotten.
But then it comes back
in the Renaissance.
>> One of the treasures of
the library is the Corpus
Hermeticum of Hermes
Trismegistus, on vellum.
>> At the end of
the Middle Ages,
with the conquest
of Constantinople,
there is the rediscovery of
the Neoplatonic texts and texts
by Plato, so the rediscovery
of Platonic philosophy.
But also the rediscovery
of the hermetic texts,
which played really a
key role in the revival
of what we call esoteric
ideas, especially in Italy.
In Florence, more particularly,
with Cosimo de Medici and then
Lorenzo Magnifico of
course, with scholars
such as Marsilio Ficino,
Piccola de la Mirandola.
It all starts in Italy but then
it's spread all around Europe.
>> I was in the Medici
library in Florence.
And it was built
by Michelangelo.
And there was an exhibition
to commemorate the 500
years since the death
of Marsilio Ficino.
The director of
the Medici library,
she said to me, Mr. Ritman,
I have a present for you.
But can't take it away.
She gave me in my hands.
And that was the original copy
of the manuscript of the Corpus
Hermeticum.
Cosimo de Medici gave an
order to Marsilio Ficino
to translate the text of
the Corpus Hermeticum.
And then it was printed.
And you see it there in
an original publication
on parchment.
>> There's also a very,
very interesting story.
When we did an exhibition
on the text and tradition
of the Corpus Hermeticum,
we had a Dutch translation
in manuscript of the
Corpus Hermeticum.
But one half of the
book was missing.
In that period I
still lived at home.
And at a certain
evening, something
was put in our postbox.
And it was a booklet.
And it said, with a
small note, Mr. Ritman,
I think you should have
this in the library.
And that was so amazing
because it was the missing part
of that same particular book.
That was reunited in this way.
And these are moments you cannot
even imagine it to happen.
And it has all happened
in the past 30 years.
>> We're talking about
Hermes Trismegistus.
And another attribute is the
ouroboros cyclical serpent
biting its own tail.
And to end with the
Staff of Hermes.
And there's a beautiful picture
at the end, an engraving,
which captures all three.
You have the Greek
Hermes on top.
In the middle it's
the hieroglyphs,
the Egyptian Thoth.
And here you have
Hermes Trismegistus
in Oriental garb, the wise
sage, the wisdom teacher.
All three are here
combined in this engraving
from the late 18th century.
>> This is one of the later
editions of the Corpus
Hermeticum, a scholarly
edition in Latin.
In other languages, such
as Italian, Dutch, English,
there are also editions
of the Corpus Hermeticum.
All the books were
very often rebound.
And not only once but
maybe four or five times.
And every time a new binding
was put around the book,
the binder cut the
paper nice and sharp.
But we lose a bit of text then.
This is the first time
the texts of Hermes
were translated into German.
And as you can see
that was rather late.
It's 1706.
Of course, everybody could
read Latin in those days.
So they kept printing
the Latin edition.
An illustration like
this, of course,
has to do with the book.
It refers to the Emerald Table,
also a text ascribed to Hermes.
And it says, so above, so below.
The macrocosmos, that the world
above, the world of the gods,
and the microcosmos,
the world of man.
>> This Corpus Hermeticum
is also having the Tabula
Smaragdina.
>> This is a beautiful engraving
from the early 17th century
called the Tabula Smaragdina.
And one of the most pregnant
phrases from this very brief
text, emerald tablet of Hermes,
is, "that which is above
is like that which is below."
And it just tells you all
about the intimate connection
between the macrocosm
and the microcosm.
>> In this period of time, many
persons are coming to an idea
that there is something hidden
behind the curtain of visible
life.
>> A hidden meaning
that has to be found.
A hidden meaning that
has been handed down
in the form of tradition,
or hidden meaning that
can be discovered through
particular experiences
of revelation, of contact with
the divine dimension with God.
Or also with nature,
for instance.
A mystical experience
of fusion with nature.
>> Let's climb the mountain.
Let's try to reach the top.
Or, let's go deep in the earth.
But what you find out
at the end of the story,
you only find at
the certain moment,
some persons will
climb to the top.
Some persons who dive
so deep in the mystery.
>> This hidden meaning can
be found in different ways,
in different places.
It can be found in the text.
For instance, the Bible.
But also all other sacred texts.
It can also be
found in the Koran.
We think about Islam.
But it can also be
found in nature.
An idea that has been widespread
since the Middle Ages--
God is speaking to us not only
through the textual revelation
of the Bible, but also through
nature when we have contact
with the natural real.
We can read symbols.
We can read signs.
And through a particular
hermeneutical ability,
which is the
ability to interpret
these signs and
these symbols, we
can understand the
hidden message.
So we can understand what
God is trying to tell us.
>> So the only thing
is to open the curtain.
And then you come in a
landscape of inner reality.
But that will not say
that you reach your goal.
The man who climbed to
the top and the man who
was diving into the water
to find that hermetic pearl.
The fantastic thing
is that he brought it
in a fish bowl
frame, that everybody
could touch the experience.
That everybody could
receive that experience.
And that is how, I would
say, so mysterious.
>> Gradually, Hermes
Trismegistus becomes really
associated with alchemy.
And he becomes the father
of all philosophers.
And the practitioners
of alchemy become
known as the sons of
Hermes, the filii hermeti.
So there's a very close bond
between Hermes and alchemy.
In this library, on these
shelves, you find alchemy.
You find hermetica.
And the two are
very much related.
Hermes is, so to speak, the
patron saint of alchemy.
In the 16th and 17th centuries,
people who performed alchemy,
alchemists, were known
as the sons of Hermes.
So there is a very
close connection
between alchemy and Hermes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You don't find many
alchemical symbols painted.
This is one of the great moments
also in my interest as an art
collector.
>> It shows the
triumph of alchemy.
A triumphal chariot with--
>> Basil Valentine.
>> As it has never been
reproduced and never been
looked at by scholars.
This little painting is
probably unique in the history
of alchemical imagery.
>> A lady, who is the
negative side of alchemy,
tries to attract, I would
say, the pseudo-alchemists.
All the real adepts
were taking the secrets
of the keys of Basil Valentine
to the real process of alchemy.
>> I only recognized it because
I was looking in an old book.
And there it was redrawn.
And I thought, I
recognized this drawing.
This is the picture
that Mr. Ritman
has hanging on his
wall for 20 years.
And then I took a closer
look and found out what
an extremely rare
piece we have here.
>> For me, the imagery of
the library is so interesting
because the symbolic engravings
and drawings that you will find
in many books of this library,
they contain the same elements.
Like the circle and the
square and the triangle.
And their meaning is,
in fact, universal.
But there is endless ways that
these symbols can be applied,
whether in the work of
Christian Kabbalists
or in the works of
a mystic like Jakob
Boehme or a Christian hermetic
thinker as Robert Fludd.
>> I was always very curious.
I was never satisfied
with explanations.
And I said to myself,
let me go and look
to the reality of things.
And therefore, I
knew, that I was
a spark between the
invisible life as a spark
and then disappear again.
Mr. Ritman disappeared.
So I ask myself, when I am
only a spark, a light flash
in a moment, why I should not
build a library of awareness,
of research.
I started this library
with the hermetic science.
The hermetic science is a
science of all awareness.
I am convinced.
With the Hermetic tradition,
you come into contact
not only with people,
but also with religions,
with mystery schools,
with initiates.
And for me, the mystery
schools around the world,
they connected to
the master plan
and with the flow of
human awareness through,
I would say, the millenniums.
This millennium is a
completely different paradigm
of references than what we
saw, so far, in the last 5,000
years.
Different developments
of religion.
of spirituality.
And now it comes together
in one global goal.
And that is, for me, gnosis.
Gnosis.
Hermeticism, agnosticism,
they have the same roots
in all the stories, in all
the religions of the world.
It has to do with, I
don't want to call it God.
But I want to call it Creator.
Creation.
And creation and men.
The three aspects of, I
would say, the divine.
The element of nature.
The two elements of nature,
the male and the female,
come together in a macrocosm.
>> Gnosis is the third component
of our European cultural
heritage.
And that's what we have
here in the library.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
>> Gnosticism.
They speak about
light and darkness.
The point in Hermeticism
is that they don't reject
the gnostic approach of life.
But they say it is the
task of a human being,
through daily experience
in your life, where
you meet positive and
negative influences,
to come to the point that they
are always going together.
That they have a meaning.
If we don't see that
this library has meaning,
if we don't see that the
last 12,000 years are also
a reflection of the waves of
life, if we don't see that,
then we don't come to a
point of concentration.
And so this library is a
>> Of all the books
in the Ritman Library,
I love the hermetic
books most because to me,
this hermetic worldview, the
relation between god, kosmos,
man, is the essence of
human consciousness.
That's the universal aspect in
all religious and philosophical
traditions.
And what's most important
is that a human being, him
or herself, it's about us.
It's about you.
It's about me.
In the hermetic
tradition it's said,
when you want to know
God, know yourself.
Study nature.
And you will know God.
>> The only reason that
everything is not OK is that we
lack knowledge.
Knowledge of a
dimension that we don't
bring into our daily practice.
The gnosis is ours.
It is an energy field.
What we don't use together, that
is the misuse of the spirit.
That we are only living,
that we are consumers,
but that we are not soul beings.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> Kabbalah.
Jewish forms of mysticism
and esotericism,
begin in the late
Middle Ages, especially
in the South of France and
also in those areas that
were a kind of crossroad between
Islamic, Christian and Jewish
culture, especially in Spain.
Some authors in this period
construct a whole system
of occult philosophy, which
is a kind of synthesis effect.
Heinrich Cornelius
Agrippa, for instance,
writes a famous work called
The Occulta Philosophia, where
he tries to bring
together all these ideas.
So, Christian Kabbalah,
magic, astrology, alchemy.
They're trying to make a kind of
consistent vision of the world
based on this occult wisdom.
Occultists were
opposing some of what
they perceived to be
kind of negative aspects
of both science and religion.
In terms of science,
the biggest problem
was, of course,
materialism, the idea
that the universe is constructed
only on the basis of matter.
That there is no space
for spirituality,
for the spiritual
aspects of reality.
When it came to religion the
biggest problem that was felt
was seen in the presence
of dogmatism, the idea
that in fact, established
churches had sort of become
petrified in their message.
They had lost some of
the living spirit that
was there when they
had been created,
when they had been founded.
>> I don't want to say that
I have nothing with magic.
And that I have nothing
with the occult.
There are very
important magicians.
But for me that's not enough.
It was not so important
to look at myself,
but to look to nature,
to look to the cosmos
as a fantastic
development of life waves.
And to see the universe
as an infinite laboratory.
[HORN MUSIC]
>> A little bit later,
in the German speaking,
there are other currents that
are emerging, with Paracelsus,
who is starting off what could
be considered a different kind
of tradition, a
different kind of trend,
which later will take the
form of Christian theosophy.
Especially after Jakob Boehme.
[HORN MUSIC]
>> One of the great names
of alchemy and medicine is,
of course, Paracelsus, who was
born in Switzerland and who was
known as Trismegistus
Germanus, the German Hermes.
Because he really believed in
that Christian hermetic world
picture.
And also believed that you could
use minerals to cure people,
to heal and perfect nature.
[CHAMBER MUSIC]
>> This is one of our books
in the original binding,
dated 1512.
The Letters of Saint Paul.
This is a text of the Bible.
A Bible text is not a
heretic text, of course.
But in the commentaries
we find these pasted
in pieces of paper.
That makes it very interesting.
Because in old printed books,
two copies are never the same.
That is very well illustrated.
As you can see, one
copy is a paper copy.
And this is a copy printed
on vellum, on parchment.
All over the commentaries
this text is censored.
If we look at the
same page in this copy
we will find no
censored passages.
So it depends where
the book was used.
If certain ideas were
thought to be heretic or not.
But the general point is
that many of our authors
got into problems
with the Church.
>> Men who were crucified,
who were killed,
who were brought to the stake.
They represented
an inner reality
and they said, no, no,
no, to dictatorship,
that you have to obey.
Giordano Bruno, is
one of the, for me,
the main philosophers
of the 16th century.
He was burned at the
stake in the year 1600
by an accusation of heresy
by the Catholic Church.
But there was one book that
brought him to the stake.
And it was this text, Spaccio
Della Bestia Trionfante.
Anyway, it was a
dialogue to break
the walls of the scholastic
approach of the Church,
that the Earth is in the
center of the universe.
But he said, no.
That the universe is infinite.
So there is no center.
There is no center
in the universe.
[STRING MUSIC]
In our library we have about 20
publications, first editions,
by Giordano Bruno.
But this book was missing.
I was in Venice.
And I was there
with a conference.
Save Venice.
The water flood of Venice.
And I was there with so
many international visitors,
but in a special
forum with people
that were interested in books.
And the last evening, there
was an antiquarian bookseller
who brought some books about
architecture in Venice.
And suddenly it came with
me to my mind to ask,
do you have copies
of Giordano Bruno?
And he said, yes, Mr. Ritman.
I have two.
I have de Umbris Idearum and I
have the Spaccio Della Bestia
Trionfante.
And it was so nice that Bruno
was taken prisoner in Venice.
I felt myself very
close to Giordano Bruno.
And then to acquire
a book in the city
where he was taken prisoner
was very moving for me.
And in Rome was
the commemoration
of 400 years since the
death of Giordano Bruno.
I was given a compliment
by the Minister of Culture
to bring treasures to
Rome of Giordano Bruno.
He was burned at the stake
at the flower market in Rome.
Campo de Fiori.
And now you are
here in the kennel
of the flowers in Amsterdam.
My relationship with
Giordano Bruno is very close.
[HORN MUSIC]
I created a foundation.
I want to bring all
these different opinions
and offer all these different
experiences together.
This library is a
library of information
about the inner network
of the human search
for the destiny of life.
[FOUNTAIN SOUND]
That new energy.
You can call it aquarius,
or heavenly water,
that comes through the
earth will clean up
many, many, many,
many dark things,
or things that are
crystallized et cetera.
Life is always on the
move like a river that
floats through a landscape.
But it brings energy.
It brings the mineral
life, vegetable life,
the geological life.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> The meaning of
something that is inside,
something that is interior,
remained of course.
And is still present today.
And in fact, most people
when they are using the term
esotericism are probably using
it precisely with this meaning.
So referring to a religious
message that goes beyond what
is visible in the literal form
of a sacred text, for instance.
You could see that there
is a story in the Bible.
And you could wonder whether
the story that is being told
is the only message
that is there.
And ask yourself
whether perhaps there
is a kind of hidden
meaning, a hidden story.
[STRING MUSIC]
>> The Polyglot Bible was
printed in Antwerp in 1573.
>> It's a Catholic Bible, the
so-called polyglot edition
of the Bible.
That means that all the
languages in which the Bible
manuscripts were
originally found
are reproduced here together.
>> Hebraic, Chaldaic,
Greek and Latin.
So four languages.
It is an example of book
illumination of the highest
quality that you can
find in the world.
>> All the illustrations
are hand colored.
When the book left the
press, the illustrations
were just black and white.
I love rare books, old books,
because the paper is still as
if it was produced yesterday.
It's paper that is made by hand.
But this old paper that
will last for ages.
That makes me happy.
[STRING MUSIC]
>> On the one hand, it was
thought that it was possible
to demonstrate the existence
of a spiritual dimension.
And on the other hand,
many esotericists
thought that it was
possible to revive
a kind of religious
spirit by applying
a different way of reading
the ancient texts, a sort
of metaphorical
reading, an emblematic
reading of the texts.
[CHAMBER MUSIC]
>> In the 19th century--
I think also, actually,
in theosophy, it
was a very pregnant symbol.
The Renaissance of course was
a time of great open-mindedness
and intense curiosity
about other religions,
about what moved other people.
And this is a wonderful
image actually
in a manuscript of 1575.
And it shows the
[INAUDIBLE],, known
as the 10 divine attributes.
In Hebrew Kabbalah, you
have keter, chochma, binah,
down to malchut.
And these are the
channels through which
God can communicate with us.
As above, so below.
That's the hermetic
phrase par excellence.
So we have these [INAUDIBLE],,
these rotating wheels
that you can rotate.
And each [INAUDIBLE]
has the same number
of [INAUDIBLE],, the
10 written on them.
And they were used
to meditate upon.
>> Alchemy is the
book of nature.
>> Alchemy, really, is
an exciting subject.
Fascinating.
And it continues
to fascinate today.
>> My fascination for alchemy is
that it is a process of change.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> Alchemy.
It's fascinating because it's
to do with laboratory work.
But it's also to do with
discovering nature and finding
out about the secrets of nature.
And it was believed
that God had implanted
in nature the secrets for
us, for man, to discover,
to find out.
And also to perfect nature.
>> And this is also very nice.
[SPEAKING GERMAN]
[STRING MUSIC]
I have a principle that I
say, that the divine spark
is within you.
That divine spark has
to become a flame.
A flame of awareness.
And what that flame
should produce is fire.
Fire.
And that fire is your heritage.
So.
Spark.
Flame.
Fire.
And that fire, that
produces this fifth element.
>> What the people at
CERN are doing now is what
the scientists, the alchemists
in the 17th century were doing
also.
They were working
in the laboratory.
And they were exploring nature.
>> You see an interior
of an alchemist.
To pray, an oratorium, and
to work, a laboratorium.
And that is from Khunrath.
>> Heinrich Khunrath, a German
alchemist, a physician also,
is another very well-known
engraving called The Laboratory
and the Oratory.
And here you have
Khunrath himself.
He's meditating.
He's freeing his mind before he
can perform the alchemical work
in the laboratory.
So you have the two--
the oratory and the laboratory
actually on the same level.
There is no hierarchy.
That performing alchemy
and praying to God
are on the same level is really
a very astute observation.
>> I was always interested
in the laboratory of nature,
the laboratory of the universe,
and the laboratory of the man
as a microcosm.
>> It's that sort of connection
that's really fascinating.
That between the work in the
laboratory and the bigger
picture.
The idea of man as a microcosm,
who by exploring nature,
can discover the secrets
that God implanted in nature
for the perfection of mankind.
>> So many esotericists at the
time thought that esotericism
could give an answer to
that problem and could solve
the conflict that existed
between science and religion.
So by constructing the
kind of common ground,
common fields like a
bridge between the two.
>> This is the Atalanta
fugiens of Michael Maier.
There is 50
illustrations and it has
to do with text, with
music and emblems.
So it's an emblematic book.
And it is the main
work of Michael Maier.
That brings me to
the story in Paris.
With my private plane
I flew to Paris.
Then I met an antiquarian
book dealer of Amsterdam.
He wanted to take
possession of the books
and to sell them
to me afterwards.
Then he came to me.
He said, Joost, can
we speak together?
And I said, no.
I come here for a special
reason, to buy books.
So there is for me
no need to speak.
We will meet in auction.
There are some major auctions.
And there you have to fight.
You have to be prepared that
you have to pay the price.
And you never know the price.
They spoke about the
night of the alchemist.
People who came there
together to get the recipe
for gold making.
So the people who are interested
in the original writings
were coming together
and were fighting.
In the second half
of the last century,
many very rare books
and manuscripts
came to the book market.
And now that period is over.
So you can really
say that I took
the opportunity from
the early 60s, and now
more than 50 years later, to
make this library complete.
I bought at that
auction one third
of all the available texts.
[SLOW MUSIC]
This is a priceless book.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
In the mystery of alchemy,
here, he's a farmer.
He is giving the
seed to the land.
But these are not normal seeds.
They are gold seeds.
The real alchemist
brings the seeds
of gold making to the earth.
There is a seed.
And you have to put that in the
inner center of your awareness.
That seed.
And at that moment that you have
went through the experience,
you see that that seed starts
to grow and to flourish
in a different dimension.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
And here is a circle.
And then a square.
And then a triangle.
And out of the circle
the square and a triangle
compose a man and a woman.
And there you have the
two elements in alchemy.
The male and the
female come together
to create the stone
of [INAUDIBLE]..
[CHANTING MUSIC]
[HORN MUSIC]
The library is a daily
journal of 5,000 years
of human research into
the field of spirituality
and into the field
of the unexpected.
[HORN MUSIC]
In alchemy they speak
about three principles.
About silver that is
related to the Sun,
mercury that is
related to the Moon,
and salt is related to matter.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> The engravings that they
contain have been produced
in the same house.
It was the engraver Miriam,
who was working in Oppenheim.
Atalanta fugiens.
That's in fact a multimedia
booklet, I would say,
that makes alchemy interesting
to a broader audience.
There have also been moments.
For example, a very beautiful
hand-colored edition
of the Atlanta fugiens
was offered to him.
And a colleague
and friend of his
said, OK, Joost,
you have so much.
Please let me buy this one.
And he's still sorry
that at that moment
he didn't go for it.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> Mysticism is the book of
the knowledge of the heart.
The knowledge of the
heart goes deeper
than the awareness of the eyes.
>> Also Christian theosophy
is very important,
which has its roots in
the 17th century already.
And even earlier with
Paracelsus and then later
with Jakob Boehme.
>> And for me, the most precious
book in mysticism is the Aurora
of Jakob Boehme.
>> In the case of Jakob Boehme
it's a mystic experience.
>> This is the Aurora.
A new momentum.
An Aurora for the
awareness of humanity.
And Jakob Boehme--
>> --was not a learned person.
He had a vision.
He had a visionary mind.
And he felt he should
write about it.
>> These new moments
that has come.
The planet Earth.
Here you see the zodiac.
And here, suddenly, a completely
new element is coming.
>> If you see an image like
this in the favorite book
of my father, you're not
immediately able to explain.
You are able to grasp
the meaning somehow.
It gives you some sensation of,
wow, this is really special.
>> The root, or
mother, of philosophy,
astrology and theology.
So this is also a
fantastic present.
And I could say that was
the spark that became
a flame in my collector's life.
That was the present
when I was 23 years old.
That's now more
than 50 years ago.
That I got from my mother.
And this is one of the
early copies of the library.
It's what you call now what
are now the first momentums,
the first books.
So this, perhaps,
was the first book
that came to the collection.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> I do discoveries
all the time.
If you look at this booklet
by Johann Gichtel, a follower
of Jakob Boehme, it's
a short introduction
about the three principles
and the worlds within man.
He's talking about
worlds in men.
So there is a world
of darkness inside us.
[OMINOUS MUSIC]
That fascination that I
personally have always had
is the fascination for the
imagery of the library.
Of course, I've grown up
in the world of ideas.
A lot of the content of
these books is visionary.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
So what's happening
is the complete works
of Jakob Boehme have been
translated and put into print.
And what you see--
that there is
again an artist who
feels compelled to visualize.
Here is our Sun.
And here's the Moon.
And here's the Earth.
So there you have already
a macrocosmic reality.
The abstract world
of the microcosm
and the way the macrocosm
and the defined world
unfolds itself and becomes
visible in the cosmos.
[PIANO MUSIC]
This is Jakob Boehme's
explanation of the human being,
the androgenic human being.
The human being has
many instruments
to understand his
place in creation.
He uses his senses.
He uses his reason.
And he has even
got an astral mind.
So he's able to understand
abstract principles.
[PIANO MUSIC]
Our eyes open up and
then we see what's there.
This is the symbol
for the holy trinity
with the fiat in the end and
also probably in the beginning.
[INAUDIBLE]
[PIANO MUSIC]
[OPERA SINGING]
>> That's the Book of Wonders.
Wonderboeck.
Wunderbuch.
[OPERA SINGING]
Sofia, the mother of wisdom.
And here you see that
she conquered the snake.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> At the beginning of the 17th
century we have the outbreak
of the 30 year war, which
is going to change, really,
Europe, which is going to
have very serious consequences
politically and historically.
In the historical climate right
before the outbreak of this war
it's that Rosicrucianism begins.
>> It started with my father
just knocking on the door
of an antiquarian
bookseller, asking,
I want to buy the
Fama Fraternitatis.
He started to laugh and said,
OK, I'm looking for that
all my life as well.
So what do you think?
>> It's a German
affair so to speak.
Because it originated
in Tubingen in 1614,
where the first Rosicrucian
manifesto was written,
actually.
Fama Fraternitatis, the
call of the brotherhood.
And it was a very
small pamphlet which
called on all the
learned heads of Europe
to achieve a reformation,
a worldwide reformation,
of science, religion and
really of everything.
And making man realize
he is the microcosm.
>> The human being as
a microcosm is in fact
their medicine to a society
that has lost its religious
orientation.
>> Rosicrucianism is in a way
the chain of representatives
who saw the contact between
the heart, the mind and nature.
>> The Rosicrucians were
followers of Paracelsus.
Paracelsus is actually one of
the only people in the Fama
Fraternitatis who is
mentioned by name.
The people behind the
Fama Fraternitatis
were dedicated physicians.
They were Paracelsians.
And they produced this pamphlet
to inspire people to bring
about a real reformation.
>> The manifestos are only three
books, some hundreds of pages.
>> The Fama Fraternitatis
in that sense is also a very
ethical little pamphlet.
It was followed by the Confessio
Fraternitatis and the Chymische
Hochzeit.
And these three
pamphlets together
are called the
Rosicrucian Manifestos.
And they are really the
source of a great furor
in German society on the
eve of the 30 Years War.
>> In the very first lines of
Fama Fraternitatis, it is said,
now, after all we've learned
and all gifts and grace that God
has bestowed on us, it's now
time to understand why we are
a microcosm.
>> It's a wonderful story,
that of Christian Rosenkreuz,
who travels to the Orient, who
collects all kinds of magical
alchemical,
Kabbalistic knowledge.
He takes it with
him back to Europe
and presents it to the
learned heads of Europe,
who don't want to know.
>> There are traditions related
to alchemy, to astrology,
and also very much to magic that
are still present in the Middle
Ages, and that are being kept
alive in the territories that
are controlled by the Arabs.
>> On his journeys,
Christian Rosenkreuz,
the protagonist of the
Fama Fraternitatis,
also visited Fez,
the city in Morocco.
And it's been established
recently that the rules
of the brotherhood--
four of them--
are actually based on those
of a Sufi community in Fez.
So it's really remarkable
that it's presented
as a magical tale almost.
But of course, like magic, it
also has its roots in reality.
And so what the Fama
Fraternitatis urged
was a reformation.
Also, because they were
Paracelsians and therefore
physicians, they also
urged their colleagues
to cure people for free.
>> The Arabs played a key
role in transmitting the Greek
culture by translating
philosophical treatises
into Arabic and then
from Arabic into Latin.
>> But if you look to the
traditional Rosicrucianism,
there are hundreds of thousands
of persons who are interested
to know about the
Rosicrucianism.
>> This is a watercolor drawing.
It's the original
illustration in the book
of Manly P. Hall, The Secret
Teachings of All Ages.
And what we see here is a very
important moment in the Fama
Fraternitatis, where one of the
brothers, who is an architect,
he wants to improve
something in the building.
And he sees a small nail
in the wall and he thinks,
I should tear that out.
And when he does
he finds a door.
And when they carefully take
everything away and open
the door they find the grave
of Christian Rosenkreuz,
the founder of the
Rosicrucian brotherhood,
their father-brother,
as they call him.
And on his grave they
find a copper plate.
This [? minitus ?] mundi, all
the knowledge and the secrets
of the Rosicrucians.
>> The man is a minitum mundi,
a little world, a microcosm.
To come to the question, what
is the reason behind that?
>> During my lifetime I have
made the entire compendium
of all this knowledge
to my grave.
That's a very
mysterious sentence.
>> But the meaning of the
manifesto is always the same
secret.
That it has to do with the
triangle of creativity.
You can call that art.
Research, you can
call that science.
But then with an invisible
framework of reality.
And then religion.
And religion is only
the task to bring things
together within in one scope.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> We focused on the imagery of
books around the Rosicrucians.
Of people who were
not Rosicrucians.
They were advocating
their ideas.
Robert Fludd claimed that he
has written this encyclopedic
work, Utriusque Cosmi Maioris,
the physical, metaphysical and
hyper-physical world,
without having any notice
of the Rosicrucian manifestos.
Still, in all his telling,
he's giving the same key
of the microcosmic man.
>> In the microcosm,
that's for me the promise.
If you go through the
process of experience
you can be in direct
connection with the creator.
And with that you
become a co-creator.
And that is, for me, the
message of my library.
I'm only a co-creator.
We can produce nectar
like a bee to a bee hive.
And that nectar is the food for,
I would say, human awareness.
>> A beautiful engraving
of Robert Fludd also made
by Marian of the human mind.
Man has an inner
awareness connected
to the world of the senses, to
the world of the imagination,
to define reality.
And there's also
the world of memory.
>> The perfect man is aware that
life in itself is not something
that you can put like a picture
or a painting within a frame.
There is no frame for life.
There is no limit
to human existence.
>> There is one element that
connects all these worlds.
And that's the human soul.
All the impressions that we
obtain through our senses
also give us an
image, a sensation.
We can connect all we see
and smell to our imagination.
But our imagination is also,
again, a tool of the soul.
Because when we imagine
us to be a bird,
as it is said in the
Corpus Hermeticum,
we are already there,
high in the sky.
And a human being,
with his imagination,
can grasp some meaning of
being of the divine world.
And that's what is shown here.
So with our ratio, our
intellect and our spirit,
we can enter the divine world.
He says also, the divine world
is in constant interaction
with the whole world.
But also with the human mind.
So it works both ways.
Michelspacher was also aware of
the manifestoes and in context
with people in this circle.
This has also been
designed by Marian.
[GUITAR MUSIC]
>> They follow the
tradition of human research.
So hermeticism goes
back to 5,000 years ago.
Alchemy goes back
to 3,000 years ago.
The mysticism is
related to Christianity,
to put Christ in the center.
You can also mention Kabbalah,
the Jewish tradition.
It's so very important.
But Rosicrucianism combines
all these different flows.
They are the fruit
of, I would say,
5,000 years of spiritual
exploration of the human mind.
>> Daniel Mogling wrote a book
that's called The Wisdom Mirror
of the Rosicrucians.
And then he writes
in his text, you
know about this mysterious
brotherhood of the Rose Cross
that everybody's asking for.
If you want to know what the
meaning of the Rosicrucian
message is, study this
engraving closely.
All you need to know about
Rosicrucians is there.
I cannot say more.
Because you know what happens.
When you say something, they
are twisting your words.
So I cannot say more.
But, one thing.
Once you understand why
man is called a microcosm,
you will encounter
a Rosicrucian maybe
in your direct neighborhood.
So what he is saying there,
that the imagery is a tool that
is more accurate and
pure than any words
he could express in his book.
>> This is a copy
of the [INAUDIBLE]..
It was printed in the
late 18th century.
But it returns to the sources
of the 16th and 17th centuries.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
>> It's an image of the heavenly
and terrestrial [? Eva, ?]
the mother of all creatures
in heaven and on Earth.
Lady Sophia, or
the Virgin Sophia.
From her wisdom the divine
comes into manifestation
because of our consciousness.
Because we become aware of the
connection between the divine
and the cosmos and the
human being as the creature.
>> This for instance is a
beautiful image from Daniel
Mogling's Speculum
Rhodostauroticum.
The Mirror for
the Rosuicrucians.
And it's called [INAUDIBLE].
The [INAUDIBLE] of wisdom.
>> A man.
And he's connected with mineral,
vegetable and biological life.
So the microcosmos
and nature itself.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
>> The human being
connects eternity and time.
The human being
is again displayed
as an instrument, an
instrument of the divine fiat.
In the middle you have
man, who is the microcosm.
And the Latin word tibi,
for you, which means,
we are the microcosm and that
is God's gift to the world.
We as men, as people, we
rely on our five senses.
But we also have
knowledge of God.
Inner knowledge.
The Corpus Hermeticum
also says it.
That is why man is the
most gifted of creatures.
Because he has the use of
his five senses but also he
has gnosis.
He can achieve a
knowledge of God.
And that is what this
image is also all about.
Omnia [INAUDIBLE].
Everything from the one.
Omnia ad unum.
Everything returns in the one.
>> Everything through the unity
brings everything to the unity.
So here you have the creator.
You have the nature.
And here you have
the waves of life.
And everything comes
together in the microcosmos.
[CHANTING MUSIC]
>> The phenomenon of
western esotericism can be
characterized by the fact that
in most historical periods it
seems to be at odds with
mainstream religious thinking.
And then later,
especially starting
with the scientific
revolution and with the period
of the Enlightenment, also
with scientific and rational
thinking.
>> The library is a telescope
of visions of thousands
of persons.
But my life itself, my
inner life, is a microscope.
>> Perhaps an author you
might not expect to find
on the shelves of this
library, which is a hermetic,
alchemical, magical
library, is Spinoza.
And but he is here.
This is an edition of one
of his most famous works,
the Tractatus
Theologico Politicus.
It's an amazing work in itself.
It's also a very
special edition.
As you can see it was
supposedly printed in Hamburg.
But it wasn't printed
in Hamburg at all.
It was printed in Amsterdam.
Amsterdam in the 17th
century was a great city
for freedom of expression,
freedom of the press.
Spinoza was very well
aware of the fact
that this was a
very explosive work.
It's in Latin.
It's international, Latin
being the Lingua Franca.
And we have a letter from
Spinoza to a friend of his.
And he says, don't
publish the work in Dutch
because the ministers,
the preachers,
are already up in
arms against me.
And if this work becomes
available in Dutch
I will have no end of trouble.
So the Dutch translation
of the Tractatus
was only published in 1693
when Spinoza was long dead.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> This kind of conflictual
relationship should not be
overemphasized in the
sense that, in many cases,
you see that authors are
trying to find a compromise.
And if we move a little bit
later, to the 18th century,
we encounter another very
important phenomenon,
which is modern Freemasonry.
And that's very important
because although we already
see this model earlier
on with the beginning
of Rosicrucianism-- so, the
idea that in fact, esotericists
don't work alone.
That, in fact, they
should be organized
in some sort of brotherhood,
some sort of fraternity kind
of organization.
[SOFT MUSIC]
But with Rosicrucianism it's
not clear whether this was just
a project--
something that was on paper--
or whether such an organization
really existed.
Well, with Freemasonry, we have
a real, concrete organization
that is being created.
So people getting
together and engaging
in all sorts of communal
activities and rituals
and so on.
>> We had famous
visitors in the past.
Umberto Eco, who is also a
great collector of hermetic
and alchemical works.
Last year we had Dan
Brown, who was totally
amazed by this
collection because he
has written so many novels
about Rosicrucians, Freemasons.
So he was bowled over by
his visit to the library.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> One should not think that
Freemasonry is esoteric,
per se, because Freemasonry
in fact is a very complex
phenomenon.
And there are traditions
in Freemasonry
that are more open to
esotericism, to spirituality,
and other traditions
that perhaps
prefer to have a kind of
more rational approach
to spirituality.
[OPERA SINGING]
>> The microcosmos is a spark
of the Big Bang in the Big Bang.
It's the god's
particle in creation.
And I carry that god's particle
as a treasure in my life.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> The library is so special
because it's a private library
but it's open to the public.
And it has on the
shelves authors
who wanted to unite people
and bring them together.
Who didn't want division.
Who didn't want
religious strife.
Who wanted people to
acknowledge, to realize,
that they are a
mirror of nature,
that they are the microcosm.
That great hermetic
sentence-- as above, so below.
>> Man is a mirror of light.
He has a task of connection.
So to receive that energy.
>> The 18th century, of
course, is also the Age
of the Enlightenment,
which should be the age
of rationality.
It insists on the
importance of reason
and the importance of science.
It sees at the same
time the development
of another esoteric
current which
also makes a reference to the
symbol of the light, which
is called illuminism.
>> There is a direct
energy floating throughout
the universe.
The simple example, light.
Light in itself is invisible.
But at the moment that it
comes into contact with matter
it becomes color
and becomes life.
And we can say the Sun
is the origin of light.
But light in itself, of
the Sun, is invisible.
>> Illuminism lays great
emphasis on the idea
of mystical knowledge.
A based mystical approach to
nature and to the mysteries
of the universe,
which is perhaps
the kind of flip side
of the Enlightenment.
>> My father decided he wanted
to make his private collection
publicly accessible in '84.
He had the vision to
immediately say, OK.
When we open up this collection,
which is in fact a knowledge
field, it should be
accessed in a scholarly way.
>> I built my library.
I built the Research Institute.
I was everywhere together
with my staff in exhibitions.
I published many books
about this field.
And now I want to come to a
certain point that we say,
let us share the future.
>> We want to build a global
hermetic circle of people who
are genuinely interested.
We started the project
Hermetically Open
to share every
activity and aspect
that we do with the collection
in exhibitions and projects
and the Ritman Institute
and our publishing
house in the Pelikaan.
>> Simple.
Brief.
Clear.
Transparent.
Not to come with answers
that people don't understand.
>> Hermetically Open to all
has in fact, after a few years,
become our main strategy as a
library because we have quite
an elaborate scholarly context
we have established over
the years.
And we see that it's
important that we open up
all this knowledge,
all this expertise,
to a broader audience.
And not only share
our collection
but also share our
expertise in this way.
>> I always saw the total
field in front of me.
And then the books came.
The field of
magnetism, of energy.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> At the end of the 18th
century we have the current
of animal magnetism
with Franz Anton Mesmer.
And another important
current is Swedenborgianism,
based on the teachings
of the Swedish visionary
and mystic Emanuel Swedenborg.
These two currents combined--
Swedenborgianism and
animal magnetism,
or Mesmerism as it
is sometimes called--
form a sort of backbone
to all later esotericism.
>> I went to all the different
four corners of the world.
It's all the same.
But it comes together
in one awareness.
The East, the West, the
North and the South.
They will meet in a new
consensus of questions.
Where do I come from?
Why am I here?
And what is the destiny of life?
>> In the 19th century
we have Spiritualism,
which really begins in America.
The classical date that is
mentioned for the beginnings
of this movement is 1848.
The very basic idea that it is
possible to have communication
with the spirits of the dead.
So that it is possible
to talk to them,
to receive messages
from them, and therefore
to know about what is going
to happen to us when we die.
Most of the messages
that are being received
through Spiritualism are in fact
related to the destiny of man
after death.
>> The soul is the property
of the microcosmos.
The human presence is,
I would say, a traveler
in time and space.
So I can't tell
you how many times
I came here again and again.
The transmigration of souls.
I would give myself
as an example.
My soul comes back at the
moment that I'm here again.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> We tried to collect the
first editions of, for instance,
Madame Blavatsky's works.
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> Spiritualism is not
very much based on the idea
of a tradition.
It's more based on the
idea of direct experience.
You get together with a
group of sympathetic persons.
And then you engage in what
is usually called a seance.
With the help of a medium--
so, a person with the
particular skills--
you enter in contact with
the spirits of dead people.
It is that simple.
So you don't need to have a
particular tradition for that.
[PIANO MUSIC]
Occultism really begins around
the same time as spiritualism,
the 19th century.
There is a kind of
hidden spiritual wisdom
that has been handed down by a
particular series of masters,
of adepts, of initiates,
that are going to keep
alive the flame of this wisdom.
In this sense it is similar
to older forms of esotericism.
>> I warn everybody that it
is not a way of speculation.
It is very natural.
And I can say this to you.
A mystic and hermetic
person, an alchemist,
is far more concrete
than the so-called called
mystics, alchemists,
spiritists, occultists.
They only produce clouds.
And what I want to produce is an
open air that you see the Sun.
[INAUDIBLE] that
you see the reality.
That you see the
plants, the animals.
people around you.
And you see them not so much as
that they think that they are.
But that you see them
with the possibilities.
And that you inspire people.
Then I'm no longer
a mystic, praying,
sitting in inner,
deep meditation.
No.
I'm walking the streets.
I shake hands.
I embrace people with the
reality of my example.
[PIANO MUSIC]
At the moment that
you build a library,
it is an every day, every
week, every month, every year--
it's an ongoing journey.
>> After the First World
War you have a new current--
Perennialism, or Traditionalism.
The main authors associated
with this current
are Frenchmen, Rene Guenon.
But then there are
other important names.
For instance,
Ananda Coomaraswamy
or the Italian Julius Evola.
Now with Traditionalism we enter
into a bit more pessimistic,
late modern form of esotericism.
Traditionalism is based,
among other things,
on the idea that in fact we are
approaching the end of times.
We should not trust so
much the possibility
to gain new knowledge from
new discoveries of science,
for instance.
But that everything
has to be related
to a kind of primordial wisdom.
In ancient wisdom,
everything that
has created distance from
this primordial tradition
is intrinsically bad.
So all modernity,
basically, is bad.
[STRING MUSIC]
>> The library in the field
of hermetic philosophy is
for the first time brought
together in the world.
I want it to be complete
with this field.
Complete.
It took me about 50
years to be complete.
And I can say we have an
unbelievable [INAUDIBLE]
in manuscripts
and in [INAUDIBLE]
and also in modern prints.
The fascination of a collector
is that a library is never
really complete.
>> After the Second World War
we have the emergence of other
currents.
For instance,
neopaganism, especially
in the Anglo-American
world, with the creation
of particular groups
like Wicca, for instance.
That is very important.
But then we have, especially
starting from the 60s, also
other forms of esotericism
that start to develop.
For instance, the New Age.
The New Age has been perceived
by observers, by scholars,
sometimes, also as a
kind of popularized form
of esotericism.
Perhaps a commercial aspect.
Some people think that it's
a kind of degeneration,
also, of esotericism.
You have the phenomenon
of the bestseller--
what are in fact esoteric
ideas, but to a very, very
large public.
[STRING MUSIC]
>> I love rare books because
each one of them is different,
whether it's the
binding, the contents.
Someone has inscribed
his thoughts in them.
>> You share the ownership with
the people who had these books
in their hands and gave
it to the next generation.
>> Owners have come and gone.
Each rare book is different.
It's a character of its own.
>> It's not a library that
went from hand to hand to hand.
But with 30,000 books, they came
from thousands of other owners.
But they were always
kept as a treasure.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
Look.
Look to the splendor
of these books.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
Why I am always using fireworks
at the end of the year?
To say every moment,
only on New Year's Eve,
the Big Bang comes
back as a fireball.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]